Daily Briefing
Leading maritime commerce since 1734
Seized tanker Niovi was
LEAD STORY:
Seized tanker Niovi was part of legal
part of legal dispute with
dispute with sanctioned entities over
suspected Iranian cargo
sanctioned entities over
WHAT TO WATCH:
Shipping needs ‘joined-up thinking’ to suspected Iranian cargo
get close to net zero, says DNV chief
China’s unexpected PMI drop
underlines uncertainties for dry bulk
Maersk maintains full-year guidance
amid lower demand
ANALYSIS:
Norden chief eyes capesize expansion
NorthStandard pledges to support
shipowners through fuel transition
MARKETS:
Höegh Autoliners posts record quarter
as ro-ro terminal delays continue
Odfjell aims to further cut carbon
intensity after hitting 2030 target
Genco sees market improvement after
A MULTI-PARTY LEGAL dispute over a shipment of suspected Iranian
profit plunge
oil in November 2020 is potentially linked to the May 3 hijacking of the
IN OTHER NEWS: very large crude carrier Niovi (IMO: 9292498) by Iran’s armed forces.
Bankrupt US home goods giant files
FMC complaint against OOCL
The Panama-flagged vessel was the second tanker seized by Iran in the
past seven days, after the Iranian navy forcefully took control of the
CMA CGM unit launches vehicle
carrier service US-bound suezmax Advantage Sweet (IMO: 9587192) on April 27.
DHT expects solid tanker rates
Leaked emails from Wikiran show that the vessel Niovi called in
Yantai, China in November 2020 carrying nearly 2m barrels of oil
Wallenius Wilhelmsen expects strong
vehicle carrier market to continue belonging to Oman-based Nimr International and Türkiye-based ASB
Group affiliate Baslam Nakliyat, who were later sanctioned by the US.
Pacific Basin names former Maersk
veteran as finance chief
The cargo itself is suspected to have originated in Iran and was
received via a ship-to-ship transfer with the VLCC Oman Pride (IMO:
9153525), according to activist group United Against Nuclear Iran.
The leaked emails show that the cargo was owned and shipped by
Nimr, which was controlled by Mahmood Al Habsi. However, Mr Al
Habsi transferred the cargo’s title to Baslam shortly after Niovi arrived
at Yantai.
In the emails, Nimr and Baslam allege that the cargo was sold by the
consignee named on the bill of lading, Marshall Islands-based La Mere
Maritime, without their knowledge and approval, and that they were
deprived of payment.By mid-December, about 50,000 tonnes, or 357,375 interference with navigational rights in regional
barrels remained in Yantai’s shore tanks, with three waters are contrary to international law and
Chinese companies having taken delivery of cargoes, disruptive to regional security and stability”.
according to the emails.
Niovi’s technical and ISM management is Piraeus-
UANI’s chief of staff Claire Jungman said that based based Smart Tankers Incorporated, and the
on the emails, the group “strongly suspects” that the beneficial owner appears to be Altomare, according
Niovi’s seizure is tied to the legal dispute. to Lloyd’s List Intelligence. It is believed to be
ultimately controlled by Dimitris Bakos and Capt
Iran’s official news agency IRNA reported that Iran Ioannis Kaimenakis families’ interests.
seized the Panama-flagged tanker because of a
“private complaint” but offered no further details. A leaked recap agreement from June 2020 between
Nimr and Smart Tankers shows a planned STS with
Lloyd’s List attempted to call La Mere using its Oman Pride to take place in the Gulf of Oman.
Greece-based phone number, but the call was sent
straight to voicemail. In correspondence between Two bills of lading were issued for the Niovis’ voyage
Baslam’s legal counsel and lawyers the company to China in 2020, one for 1,245,065 barrels and the
hired in China, it was noted that Baslam and La other for 730,000 barrels of “Omani Crude Blend”.
Mere “have some disputes in London”.
Other leaked emails show that La Mere was in
Baslam’s China-based lawyers did not immediately dispute with Baslam over another Altomare-owned
respond to a request for comment. tanker, Carmen (IMO: 9290086), which UANI also
alleges received oil via STS from Oman Pride.
Mr Al Habsi and Nimr International were
sanctioned by the US along with Oman Pride in In a December 2020 email, La Mere appears to be
August 2021 for facilitating oil sales in support of demanding that either Baslam or Nimr remit
Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps’ Quds payment of $17m and release the Oman Pride crew’s
Force. passports in exchange for discharging the Carmen’s
cargo in Rizhao, China.
Baslam Nakilat was sanctioned in the past
December on similar grounds, along with other La Mere also threatened that “pursuant to the order
companies associated with the Türkiye-based ASB of Mr Justice Andrew Baker, investigations were
Group. made into the original source of the Carmen cargo.
Obviously this information will need to be placed
While the earlier seizure of Advantage Sweet before the court if our claim is not resolved”.
appeared to have been in retaliation for the US’
seizure of Iranian cargo on board the Greece-owned The Niovi’s registered owner, Liberia-based Grand
suezmax Suez Rajan (IMO: 9524475), no such Financing Co, was also part of the legal disputes
connection to the US has so far emerged in the pertaining to the Niovi’s cargo, the leaked emails
Niovi’s hijacking. show.
Moreoever, unlike Advantage Sweet, Niovi appeared The Standard Club explained in September 2021
to not be carrying oil when it was seized, with its last commentary that Grand Financing was facing
port call traced to a drydock in Port Rashid, Dubai. pressure by several parties claiming entitlement for
Its last Automatic Identification System signal on the delivery of the remaining cargo in the shore
May 3 did not indicate that it had taken any cargo tanks.
since.
UK High Court of Justice documents from March
A spokesperson for US State Department declined to 2021 show Grand Financing sought and was granted
comment on the Suez Rajan’s seizure but said that relief in respect of the approximately 50,855 tonnes
“Iran’s continued harassment of vessels and of cargo that remained in the Yantai Oil Terminal.WHAT TO WATCH
Shipping needs ‘joined-up thinking’ to get
close to net zero, says DNV chief
THE transport sector must tackle decarbonisation hand and the supply infrastructure that enable the
“with a much greater sense of urgency” if its transition of the deepsea fleet to new fuels on the
contribution to global emissions is to be addressed. other.
That is the view of DNV chief executive Remi Technologies are available or are under development
Eriksen in the latest of the class society’s energy and ready for deployment when a firm demand can
transition reports. be established through policies, it observes, adding
that the much-anticipated strengthening of the
Maritime requires “joined-up thinking and International Maritime Organization’s ambitions
transnational public-private commitment” together this year “is crucial to establish the required
with large-scale implementation of energy-efficiency demand”.
measures and huge amounts of alternative fuels.
At present, the report states, “the relevant policies
The study outlines the challenges faced by road, air across almost all fuels, including electric propulsion,
and sea transportation. It assesses their progress in are categorised as challenging”.
electrification and the transition to carbon-neutral
and zero-carbon energy. Electrification is said to be “impossible” for regional
shortsea and deepsea shipping, policies for drop-in
Driven by the decarbonisation push, the fuel mix in fuels using existing infrastructure are “high
the maritime subsector is expected to change challenge”, and new fuels with either retrofit or
significantly over the coming decades. existing infrastructure are “high challenge” or even
higher at “substantial”.
By 2050, shipping’s energy will switch from being
almost entirely oil-based to a mix dominated by the Green corridors
use of low- and zero-carbon fuels (50%), natural gas Nevertheless, Mr Eriksen remains optimistic,
(19%, mostly liquefied natural gas) and biomass arguing that collaboration is now at the heart of the
(18%). green strategy.
DNV has drawn the base case maritime fuel mix “More green corridors are being announced —
from the past year’s Energy Transition Outlook, although a lot of action has to take place before we
which in turn uses a combination of several see any emission reductions coming from them
scenarios analysed in DNV’s Maritime Forecast to — and there is more engagement from ports,
2050. That report details 24 scenarios across two governments, and fuel suppliers in trying to create
maritime decarbonisation pathways. this ecosystem.”
Mr Eriksen acknowledged that shipping is a hard-to- He said there is growing interest from many
abate sector, although he stressed industry leaders’ industries for the same fuels, so liaising with ports
willingness to move to cleaner fuels. will be important in aggregating more demand. This
will make the sector interesting for suppliers and
“Maritime customers tell me there is willingness to infrastructure builders to invest in.
do it [change to carbon-neutral fuels], but they
cannot do it alone. They need the infrastructure, The experience of keeping the maritime sector active
they need fuel. Much of the investment won’t be on during the pandemic “showed we can move the
board ships,” he said in an interview. “I would say needle quite fast if we concentrate on one common
the industry is ready, but it needs the right goal or ambition”.
incentives. At Singapore Maritime Week, some were
asking for a carbon levy: ‘It will be a level playing He stressed that this forecast is a “most likely
field, we can all go in the right direction.’” future” and in being not net zero, “it’s far from the
future we want,” adding shipping must go on to a
The report identifies the major gap between policies war footing if the industry is to get closer to net zero,“We think the best the world can do is go from 80% He said the industry must do the best it can in the
fossil and 20% non-fossil today to 20% fossil and time available. DNV intends to update the energy
80% non-fossil by 2050. There will still be forecasts whenever new events happen. Increasing
emissions from 20% of the energy mix, which will tension between US and China is being monitored
have to be handled through carbon capture or very closely.
nature-based solutions. It will be difficult for
aviation and shipping, and certain parts of the “Including all the ifs and buts is always hard, but we
world such as sub-Saharan Africa and the Indian wanted to put out a ‘likely’ forecast, not just a
subcontinent, to get to net zero or close to net zero scenario. Anyone can produce a scenario; it’s much
by 2050.” more difficult to put out a likely way forward.”
China’s unexpected PMI drop underlines
uncertainties for dry bulk
CHINA’s declining factory activity in April raises The non-manufacturing PMI came in at 56.4 in
concerns for the dry bulk market, which has been April versus 58.2 in March, despite recent strong
banking on the rebound of the world’s second- consumption, official data showed.
largest economy.
Construction activity, as a part of the non-
The country’s manufacturing purchasing managers’ manufacturing PMI, stood at 63.9, the second-
index fell to 49.2 from 51.9 in March. A number highest since 2012, following the peak of 65.6 in
above 50 marks expansion, while below 50 denotes a March, official data showed.
contraction.
The strong construction activity is boosted by
“A lack of market demand and the high-base effect infrastructure spending, Xiong Yuan, an economist
from the quick manufacturing recovery in the first at Guosheng Securities, said in a note.
quarter of the year” were among the reasons that
resulted in the contraction, Zhao Qinghe, a senior However, expectations for future recovery have been
statistician from the National Bureau of Statistics, lowered by several factors, including persistent
said in a statement. property weakness, a drop in industrial enterprise
profits, and rising youth unemployment, he added.
The April manufacturing PMI marked the first
contraction since December and came after a faster- Despite policy support and easing curbs, China’s
than-expected economic growth in the first quarter. property sector remains fragile.
“When you look at the sub-indices you can see how Property sales of the top 100 developers reported
demand environment is shifting, unfortunately for Yuan566.54bn ($81.96bn) in April, 14.4% lower than
the worse,” said Arrow Shipbroking head of research the previous month, according to data from CRIC, a
Burak Cetinok. major real estate data platform in China.
Both new orders and new export orders subindices Iron ore continues to slide due to concerns related to
declined sharply — new orders were as 48.8 in April, Chinese demand and production cut.
down from 53.6 in March and new export orders
was 47.6 compared with 50.4 in the previous month. “The iron ore futures listed on the Singapore
Exchange have resumed their journey south,” said
“While shrinking order backlog and shortening Shipfix senior economist and quantitative analyst
delivery times signal easing supply chain tightness, Ulf Bergman, adding that the June contracts shed
falling new domestic and export orders point to about 1% in Wednesday’s session, trading around
deteriorating internal and external demand,” he said. $101 per tonne, as the outlook for Chinese steel
production “remains subdued”.
Although falling demand from the manufacturing
sector will have a negative impact on China’s raw “In general, the steel market has entered a
material demand, Mr Cetinok said the negative stalemate,” Mysteel, a Chinese consultancy, stated in
impact “will likely be largely offset by strong an April analysis, stressing that reducing production
demand from the infrastructure sector and the may benefit the industry in the long run as steelimplemented maintenance on blast furnaces as part adding that with low fleet growth, the dry bulk
of efforts to curb losses, it said. freight rates are likely to enter the upturn in 2023.
China’s economic recovery is expected to encourage Spot rates for capesizes averaged $15,819 per day
the revival in dry bulk freight rates, Li Dan, an last month, according to Baltic Exchange data. That
analyst from Zheshang Securities said in a note, compares with the year-to-date average of $10,732.
Maersk maintains full-year guidance
amid lower demand
MAERSK saw first-quarter earnings decline and 59.2% year on year to $3.4bn on a 36.6% decline in
expects the remainder of the year to be even weaker, revenue to $9.9bn between January and March.
according to a statement.
“However, proactive cost containment measures
Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and have been successful, and the Ocean contract
amortisation was nearly $4bn for the three months negotiation season is proceeding in line with
ending March 31, compared with the year-earlier expectations,” said Maersk.
level of $9bn, or $6.5bn in the fourth quarter of
2022. Revenue fell 26.4% to $14.2bn. The company’s logistics and service division fared
better, with a flat growth in ebitda to $316m and a
Maersk said the fully-year guidance of ebitda of more than 20% increase in revenue to $3.5bn during
$8bn-$11bn and ebit of $2bn-$5bn remain the reporting period.
unchanged, with the first quarter expected to be the
strongest quarter of this year. The performance was, however, mainly driven by
the consolidation of acquisitions.
“We delivered a solid financial performance in a
challenging market, with lower demand caused by a The first quarter “was affected by lower volumes
continued destocking,” said chief executive Vincent caused by inventory corrections, especially with
Clerc. “Visibility remains low for the remainder of North American and European retailers, which was
the year and moving through this market partially offset by new commercial wins,” said
normalisation, we remain focused on proactively Maersk. “Additionally, underlying business
managing costs.” performance was impacted by lower rates in air
freight and weaker demand in e-commerce.”
He added that the Danish giant’s customers
continued to value the company’s integrated The company’s prediction for global container
logistics solutions and close partnership it demand growth for 2023 remains in the range of
provides. -2.5% to 0.5%, based on the expectation that
inventory correction will complete by the end of the
The core Ocean business, which has been affected by first half, leading to a more balanced demand
lower demand and freight rates, saw its ebitda down environment.
ANALYSIS
Norden chief eyes capesize expansion
NORDEN is setting its sights on building a greater potentially tapping into the fastest growing trade
presence in the capesize market after pulling out — bauxite from West Africa to China.
from the segment in 2016, says chief executive Jan
Rindbo. Another driver has been the China recovery story.
Part of the rationale to re-enter the biggest-sized The company bought four capesizes earlier this year.
bulk carrier segment has been to be able to offer
customers the whole spectrum of vessels in the dry “It was a good time to enter the market,” Mr Rindbo
cargo market in response to their needs, as well as said in an interview, adding that while he is open toselling the ships at a later stage, should asset prices He sees the global economy as “definitely slowing
appreciate, for now, he wants to build up the down” but dry cargo rates are at the highest in the
capesize position as well as a dedicated team. past 10 years, bar the last two years, which have
been inflated due to widespread inefficiencies
“We want to be active and have a presence in the because of the pandemic.
capesize market, predominantly through more
chartered vessels, or acquiring more ships.” Excluding China, global tonnes have shrunk by up to
8% in the first quarter of this year compared with
Mr Rindbo also sees capesizes as “a good way to the same period in 2022, he said, but that is
adjust market exposure.” The company had been countered by huge imports into China, up by 15%.
operating in the supramax and panamax segments
after exiting capesizes at the onset of the market Given hydropower capacity challenges, China has
doldrums seven years ago. been seen importing more coal from Indonesia, but
also increasingly from Russia, he said.
The capesize market is the most volatile, sensitive to
any changes in iron ore trade. When times are While China’s latest purchasing managers’ index
buoyant, owners can make super-healthy profits, but numbers for April are “largely negative” actual
any unexpected incident curtailing the supply of the import volumes, are up, he said, adding that
raw material used in steel-making can have an although property starts still look weak, the number
impact on the bottom line. of house sales is rising, which is a positive.
In terms of markets, the Russian invasion of “Over the next three to four months, you won’t see
Ukraine has seen a recalibration of trade flows. that pace of improvement as things are levelling
off, but there are still real signs of a recovery,” he
“Before, the world was about trading operational said, though it is expected to take time and be a
efficiencies, now it’s about geopolitics impacting gradual process most likely felt in the latter part
trade.” of the year.
NorthStandard pledges to support
shipowners through fuel transition
NORTHSTANDARD is in a good position to support “We have set up a working group internally and are
the changing needs of shipping as the industry goes publishing a lot of advisories and articles regarding
about switching to alternative fuels, according to alternative fuels for our members. We also
Asia managing director David Roberts. established a third-party advisory panel that
consists of representatives from shipowners,
One of the largest P&I clubs insures 20% of the classification societies, national shipping
global fleet, “so we are in a very good position to associations and others, who advise and consult
help and consider the issues surrounding with shipowners. It is a distinction between not
alternative fuels,” he said in an interview with telling the members what to do, or what not to do,
Lloyd’s List. but working with them to go through the transition.”
“That is already a significant chunk of the global Mr Roberts said a lot of risks that may potentially
fleet, and our experience is across all ship types. The emerge from the use of alternative fuels have been
approach that P&I clubs generally take regarding covered by the club.
decarbonisation and alternative fuels is not to tell
their members what they must do. “Some of the potential emerging risks from
alternative fuels, such as pollution, have been
“It is very much a commercial decision for covered by existing coverage. The clubs have already
shipowners on which path they choose. But it is our covered pollution risks, not simply from oil but also
role to stand by them going through that transition. from other pollutants that are wide enough to cover
That is very much what we are focusing on.” pollutants from alternative fuels.”
NorthStandard, which was formed by the merger of Other types of risks that can come about from
North and Standard P&I clubs, is very active in the alternative fuels are crew-related risks, Mr Roberts“Ammonia, for example, due to the corrosive nature, “We are an insurance company. But we are only
may result in potential risks to the crew. The degree as able to insure the legitimate trade. We do have in
to how much crew cover [is needed] will depend on our rules or in our contracts that insurance
how the fuels are handled, and whether there are coverage will basically terminate if a member
procedures that are developed by owners and ship violates sanctions. Any breach will result in
communities to handle those fuels correctly and safely. automatic cover cessation.
“The alternative fuel space is still a very much “Sanctions are the reality of the modern shipping
developing space, so we do not have all the answers business and the geopolitical situation. It can
yet. But generally, we have already provided for crew happen to shipowners in China, but it can happen
cover, injury, pollution and other [major risks].” anywhere. You have got the Russia-Ukraine
sanctions, but there are also Venezuelan and Iranian
Mr Roberts noted that over the past 150 years, P&I oil sanctions, North Korean sanctions and others.
clubs have been excellent in adapting when the
needs of shipping change. “What tends to happen is one [sanction] in the
international spotlight is perceived as the biggest
“It is worthwhile reflecting on the fact that shipping issue. But there always several other issues
insurance has gone through several evolutions in happening as well. It is international trade going in
terms of fuels, starting from wind and sail, to any direction and does not always involve [a
burning coal for steam engines, then moving on to particular country].”
diesel engines,” he said.
NorthStandard’s clients range from very large
“There have always been changes in ships, and there shipowners to smaller ones. “What they all have in
continue to be changes. The role for NorthStandard common is that they are all well-rounded shipping
is to adapt with our members and give them the companies,” Mr Roberts said.
insurance cover that they need as a consequence of
these changes. “We would not really say we are vetting the clients.
But what we usually do as part of getting new
“It may be that there are new emerging risks that clients, is to look at the business carefully, to make
probably have not been contemplated at this point. sure that there is a meeting of minds in terms of
We may need to adapt and fill the gaps going operational goals. We expect that they will maintain
forward.” all the necessary certificates and documentation
that they have to have, as well as documents from
Autonomous vessels classification societies and other documents they
A similar approach is taken regarding autonomous need to have under international regulations.”
vessels.
New Singapore office
Insurance coverage surrounding autonomous vessels The company’s Singapore office was opened in the
“is part of those emerging areas, that we have to look past month. Even before the merger, North P&I and
at it as things develop,” said NorthStandard director Standard Club had long-standing Singapore
James Moran. “Generally speaking, things that are associations. Standard Club was set up there in 1997,
covered by the insurance have to be [in line] with while North P&I was set up as a a representative
the regulations. Normally the insurance will follow office in 2007 and as a licensed branch in 2009.
the regulation. [The autonomous vessels space] is
the emerging area in which we have to see on a The team in Singapore comprises of nearly 60
case-by-case basis what approach needs to be taken. people, making it the biggest P&I club in the city-
We may have to tailor the package based on the risk state in terms of staff. In Asia Pacific,
involved. NorthStandard has a total strength of 135 people,
with 100 people based on the ground in Asia, and
“It goes back to the concept of mutuality. We will see the remaining 35 based in the UK.
if the mutual risks are something that we can write
within existing cover, or whether it would be “It is a very significant team, and it reflects the
additional risks we have to underwrite.” importance of both clubs have put on Asia and on
the commitment to Asia,” Mr Roberts said. “We are
Mr Roberts said that in the face of growing risks of 100% committed to expanding their business in Asia
sanctions, the club’s role is “not to be a policeman of Pacific. Asia holds a huge opportunity, with 50% ofThe club offers a full range of products from the Mr Roberts said. “We do everything from heavy
regular P&I products to specialty products. duty offshore to vanilla offshore. In all these areas,
we see growth.”
Mr Roberts noted two products — the strike and
delay product and the coastal and inland small craft In addition, NorthStandard Asian office boasts six
insurance — hold huge development potential in master marine surveyors as part of the large team.
Asia Pacific. One of them is based in China, while the remaining
five are in Singapore.
The strike and delay insurance is a type of marine
delay insurance meant for shipowners or charterers “When we are talking about alternative fuels, from
to cover commercial risk delays such as onshore site the club’s point of view, it is partly about
delays or shipboard delays, he said. underwriting, but it is also about technical and
professional expertise,” Mr Roberts said.
“While it is not a new product globally, it is quite
new here in Asia. It is not very common but we have “We are starting to get a number of queries coming
recently seen more shipowners and charterers in from our members about their ships on whether
seeking to get protection because if you are they can do [certain things regarding alternative
uninsured for this commercial delay, it could be fuels] and what we think.”
potentially quite a big hit to your balance sheet. We
have seen an increasing number of operators seeking The master marine surveyors act like loss prevention
this, so it is really exciting,” he said. experts or consultants given their technical
expertise, Mr Roberts added.
On the other hand, the coastal and inland small
craft insurance typically covers vessels below 15,000 The merger has been “a fantastic way to improve
gross tonnes. [NorthStandard]’s competitive position in the
market,” he said, adding that it would be
“This could be coastal traffic small vessels, barges, “surprising” if there were no further merger activity
even smaller passenger vessels. In Asia Pacific, there in the P&I space given the “headwinds in the
are a lot of these small craft business and we see a industry”.
lot of potential to grow that,” Mr Roberts said.
Shipowning is a very competitive market, with
Offshore renewable energy shipowners understandably very concerned about
Another important sector that is big in Asia includes money. Against this backdrop, claims trends are
the offshore space that deals with renewables, such creeping up in recent years, Mr Roberts said.
as wind or hydrogen.
“There is an understandable reluctance from
“Offshore project risks are huge because a lot of shipowners to pay premiums. At the same time,
these projects will usually require big construction costs are creeping up, especially reinsurance costs,
to keep them going. They also require specialists or information technology costs, staff costs, and office
specialised equipment,” he said. costs. On the other hand, premiums are fairly static.
Yet the costs are going up, so how are you going to
The sector is developing fast. For example, there is square that up?
growing wind turbine activity going on in Australia
and New Zealand. “We think the answer is you can start by starting to
scale up and improve your efficiency. It is also part
In terms of product offering, NorthStandard of enhancing service, not only about sticking up to
provides the full range from floating production and be a bigger organisation, but also improving service
storage units, to drilling, to smaller supply vessels, capabilities and to become better.”MARKETS
Höegh Autoliners posts record quarter
as ro-ro terminal delays continue
HÖEGH Autoliners chief executive Andreas Enger The vehicle carrier sector faced acute delays at ro-ro
says that ro-ro terminal inefficiencies are continuing terminals for much of last year due to stevedore
to impact the vehicle carrier sector as the company shortages and a build-up of cars awaiting parts
posted record profits. which were delayed by the semiconductor crisis.
“Waiting times at ports in Australia, which is one of “But the improvements elsewhere does not help
our largest trades, was quite awful during the first much when we have to take so many days out of a
quarter of the year,” he said. “We’re waiting a week round trip when our ships call in Australia.”
for a port call and that is a big challenge which is
impacting us and our customers. I went there to see The reduction in vehicle carrier capacity, being
what we could do about it but we’re struggling to partially driven by port delays, helped Höegh
find a solution.” Autoliners to record its strongest-ever quarterly
results.
Port productivity at Australian ports this winter has
been particularly affected by the need to fumigate Freight revenue for the three months ending March 31
ships offshore against the brown marmorated stink was $354m, compared with $356m in the fourth
bug, which is prevalent from September to April. quarter of last year. Operating profit rose 9% to $170m.
Australian ports apply strict biosecurity rules to
inbound ships to protect the country from the The Oslo-listed company said that the main reason
invasive pest. for its increased profits was an increase in net
freight rate of 8% together with the repricing of
“Port delays in Australia has had an impact on our freight contracts.
operations given that a large part of our fleet calls in
to Australia. It is a big problem and is partially Cargo volume for the first quarter was 4m cu m
driven by stink bugs and seeds which are seasonal,” which represented a decrease of 2.5% compared
he said. “We hope it will ease in the summer season with the previous quarter, caused by operational
while we’re working with our customers in cargo disruptions.
preparations. There is also a lack of terminal
capacity and inefficiencies at ports there.” The company said that with a low number of vehicle
carrier newbuildings being delivered and continued
Mr Engers said that most ports globally have growing demand for deepsea vehicle transportation,
shown improved productivity recently, except for Höegh Autoliners expects “favourable market
Australia. fundamentals to continue in the second quarter”.
Odfjell aims to further cut carbon
intensity after hitting 2030 target
THE chemical tanker owner Odfjell is willing to Harald Fotland in the company’s results
reduce carbon intensity beyond its 2030 target after presentation.
already achieving more than a 50% drop in the first
quarter of 2023. Odfjell has posted a net profit of $46.7m in the first
quarter of the year, down slightly from $50m in the
The Oslo-listed company reduced its annual efficiency fourth quarter of last year, although it was up
ratio by 51% compared with a baseline of 2008, sharply from just $11.1m over January-March last
achieving its target for 2030 seven years earlier. year.
“Although we have reached this target, we are still It continued to observe a “firm” chemical tanker
determined to reduce our fuel consumption even market in the first three months of 2023, driven by
more. I am very positive that we will further reduce longer trading distances because of sanctionsThe share of chemicals in the company’s products reduction of shipping is 40% by 2030, although
mix rose to 85% in the first quarter, from 80% experts suggest the UN body needs to set more
across October-December, with vegetable oils and ambitious targets to align with 1.5°C goals.
clean oil products making up just 6% and 2%,
respectively. The shipping industry has some concerns around
the metrics the IMO set for measuring carbon
The chemical tanker owner is using energy efficiency intensity, including the annual efficiency ratio, which
measures such as an overconsumption warning some suggest underestimates voyages without cargo
system, weather routing and more sustainable onboard.
propulsion systems.
Odfjell said it supports the inclusion of shipping in
The International Maritime Organization uses the the European Union’s Emissions Trading System
annual efficiency ratio for segments including from 2024.
tankers to measure vessels’ carbon intensity as part
of its new regulations that came into force this year. “Odfjell has developed a standard ETS clause which
we incorporate into our COA and voyage
The IMO’s current target for carbon intensity charterparties.”
Genco sees market improvement
after profit plunge
GENCO, a US-based bulker owner, saw freight rates reopening to coincide with the seasonal uplift in dry
firming after posting lower profits in the first bulk cargo volumes as the year progresses.
quarter of the year.
“Combined with a historically low orderbook, we
Net profit fell to $2.6m in the three months ending believe these positive demand drivers bode well
March 31, compared with its best-ever first-quarter for increasing rates in the near term. We remain
result of $41.7m last year, the company said in a well positioned to draw on our sizeable and
statement. Revenue fell to $94.4m compared to leading dry bulk platform to capitalise on a
$136.2m. strengthening market and create enduring
shareholder value.”
The start of the year was marred by seasonal factors
including the timing of the Chinese New Year, The company declared a dividend of $0.15 per share.
timing of front-loaded newbuilding deliveries, as
well as a decline in cargo volumes because of Its second-quarter-to-date time charter equivalent
maintenance and poor weather conditions in many earnings have reached $16,679 per day, which
export regions, it said. represents a 20% increase over the first three
months of the year. Most of its bookings are short-
Towards the end of the first quarter, the freight term fixtures allowing it to benefit from a
market began to strengthen driven by the subsiding strengthening market environment.
of a portion of these factors as well as China’s
continued economic reopening. The company has a strong liquidity position of
$260.4m consisting of cash and a $210m undrawn
“We have seen a significant uplift in freight rates revolver facility.
beginning in March and carrying over into the
second quarter of the year to date,” said chief As of the end of March, debt outstanding was
executive John Wobensmith. “We anticipate $162.3m after it voluntarily paid down $8.75m in the
improved commodity demand led by China’s first quarter line with its strategy.IN OTHER NEWS
Bankrupt US home goods giant files CMA CGM will bareboat charter economic slowdown in Europe
FMC complaint against OOCL the dual-fuel, liquefied natural and the Americas.
ORIENT Overseas Container Line gas vehicle carriers for 10 years
is facing a claim for from Singapore’s Eastern Pacific “Despite a reduction in global car
compensation from bankrupt US Shipping. They are part of a new sales, deepsea car shipment
home goods retail giant Bed Bath series of 12 vessels ordered by volumes are still growing quarter
& Beyond. EPS in 2021 and 2022 from China on quarter partly driven by
Merchants Jinling Shipyard. Chinese exports. This is driving a
The Hong Kong-based carrier is lot of demand for our services,”
accused of “brazen price gouging DHT expects solid tanker rates said chief executive Lasse
and profiteering” in a complaint DHT Holdings, an owner of very Kristoffersen.
lodged with the US Federal large crude carriers, expects
Maritime Commission. continued rates improvement “China has positioned itself as
after it swung to a profit in the the leader in the electric vehicle
The retailer, which filed for first quarter. transition while western car
bankruptcy in the past month, is companies are growing their
claiming damages against OOCL The company reported net profit export production out of China
of at least $31.7m. of $38m, compared with a loss of — space is sold out and even if
$17.3m in the year-earlier period, we could add 20% of capacity to
CMA CGM unit launches vehicle according to a statement. It our vessel fleet we would still not
carrier service declared a cash dividend of $0.23 be meeting customers demand.”
CMA CGM’s CEVA Logistics unit per share.
is launching its first vehicle Pacific Basin names former Maersk
carrier liner service following an Earnings averaged $49,100 per veteran as finance chief
agreement to charter four large day for the fleet, comprised of PACIFIC Basin Shipping, a Hong
car and truck carrier $35,000 per day for its time Kong-based dry bulker owner
newbuildings. chartered vessels and $54,600 and operator, has appointed
per day for those operating in the former Maersk veteran Michael
“As the automotive supply chain spot market. Tonnes Jorgensen as chief
continues to stabilise from financial officer.
numerous shocks over the past The market was healthy despite a
several years, we have remained dip in rates early in the quarter as Mr Jorgensen, 57, joins Pacific
close to our customers to China increased imports of crude Basin from the Asyad Group,
understand their challenges and oil as refinery runs picked up which controls a diversified fleet
growth opportunities,” following its reopening, and of more than 60 ships. He was
Emmanuel Cheremetinski, although Asian refining margins the Oman-based company’s
global finished vehicle product have come off this quarter, they are finance chief but also served as
leader at CEVA, said in a still profitable, the company said. acting chief executive of Asyad
statement. Shipping Co from 2019-2020.
Wallenius Wilhelmsen expects strong
“The decision to operate four vehicle carrier market to continue He began his career in shipping
deepsea ro-ro ships is a clear WALLENIUS Wilhelmsen expects with AP Moller-Maersk in 1988 as
example of our promise of vehicle carrier demand to remain a trainee, according to a
responsive logistics.” robust throughout 2023, despite statement.
Classified notices follow